Migration guide for Pythonic Resources and Config (#13600)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/guides/dagster/migrating-to-pythonic-resources-and-config.mdx

---

> title: Migrating to Pythonic resources and config | Dagster

Author: I called this migration but it is about changing an existing codebase rather than purely additive.

---
title: Migrating to Pythonic resources and config | Dagster
description: A guide to incrementally migrating existing Dagster codebases to Pythonic resources and config
---

# Migrating to Pythonic Resources and Config

> With Dagster 1.3 we added a new API to our resources and config based on Pydantic, rather than our own bespoke configuration schema API. This added more type safety and made the Python APIs more idiomatic. This guide provides information on how to migrate from our legacy resource and config system to this new system, even in large existing Dagster codebases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Dagster 1.3 we added a new set of APIs to our resources and config based on Pydantic, rather than our own bespoke configuration schema API. This added more type safety and made the Python APIs more idiomatic. This guide provides information on how to migrate from our legacy resource and config system to this new system, even in large existing Dagster codebases.
```

)
```

## Migrating resources step by step

For the rest of this guide, we will be working from this example:

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_initial_codebase endbefore=end_initial_codebase dedent=4
from dagster import (
    Definitions,
    InitResourceContext,
    OpExecutionContext,
    asset,
    resource,
)

class FancyDbResource:
    def __init__(self, conn_string: str) -> None:
        self.conn_string = conn_string

    def execute(self, query: str) -> None:
        ...

@resource(config_schema={"conn_string": str})
def fancy_db_resource(context: InitResourceContext) -> FancyDbResource:
    return FancyDbResource(context.resource_config["conn_string"])

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def asset_one(context: OpExecutionContext) -> None:
    assert context.resources.fancy_db

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def asset_two(context: OpExecutionContext) -> None:
    assert context.resources.fancy_db

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[asset_one, asset_two],
    resources={"fancy_db": fancy_db_resource.configured({"conn_string": "some_value"})},
)
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Step 1: Converting to a Pythonic resource
```

We have a API and a recommended pattern for constructing the old-style resource from the new one.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_resource_adapter endbefore=end_resource_adapter dedent=4
from dagster import InitResourceContext, resource

@resource(config_schema=FancyDbResource.to_config_schema())
def fancy_db_resource(context: InitResourceContext) -> FancyDbResource:
    return FancyDbResource.from_resource_context(context)

# old-style resource API still works, but the Pythonic resource is the source of truth
# for schema information and implementation
defs = Definitions(
    # ...
    resources={"fancy_db": fancy_db_resource.configured({"conn_string": "some_value"})},
)
```

Note that we have written a Pythonic resource while still passing the old-style one into <PyObject object="Definitions"/>, and there is a single source of truth for the config schema.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Step 2: Providing the Pythonic resource to `Definitions`
```

Now we can change `Definitions` to take the Pythonic resource. We do not need to migrate our asset code in lockstep. Pythonic resources are still put on the context.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_style_resource_on_context endbefore=end_new_style_resource_on_context dedent=4
from dagster import ConfigurableResource, Definitions, OpExecutionContext, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource):
    conn_string: str

    def execute(self, query: str) -> None:
        ...

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def asset_one(context: OpExecutionContext) -> None:
    # this still works because the resource is still available on the context
    assert context.resources.fancy_db

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[asset_one],
    resources={"fancy_db": FancyDbResource(conn_string="some_value")},
)
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Step 3: Using the resource in assets
```

    def execute_query(self, query: str) -> None:
        ...

from dagster import InitResourceContext, asset, resource

@resource(config_schema={"conn_string": str})
def fancy_db_resource(context: InitResourceContext) -> FancyDbClient:
    return FancyDbClient(context.resource_config["conn_string"])

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def existing_asset(context) -> None:
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

With Pythonic style resources you would write a class that can return that client from a method. In code that consumes that resource you would call `get_client()` access the underlying client.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_third_party_resource endbefore=end_new_third_party_resource dedent=4
from dagster import ConfigurableResource, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource):
    conn_string: str

    def get_client(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)

@asset
def new_asset(fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    client = fancy_db.get_client()
    client.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Resources with context managers
```

> `@resource` functions could also be context managers to handle initialization and cleanup tasks. This context manager was called managed by framework code rather than the user's code.

Reviewer 2: > This context manager was called managed by framework code

"called managed" reads odd to me here - drop one of the verbs?

Author: most def. typo

def asset_one(context) -> None:
    # some_expensive_setup() has been called, but some_expensive_teardown() has not
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

In the end, this caused confusion and difficult-to-understand stack traces. With new resources, the user manages this in the body of the asset or op directly.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_resource_code_contextmanager endbefore=end_new_resource_code_contextmanager dedent=4
from contextlib import contextmanager

from dagster import ConfigurableResource, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource):
    conn_string: str

    @contextmanager
    def get_client(self) -> Iterator[FancyDbClient]:
        try:
            some_expensive_setup()
            yield FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)
        finally:
            some_expensive_teardown()

@asset
def asset_one(fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    with fancy_db.get_client() as client:
        client.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

## Passing a resource directly while having the underlying client on the context

> This change to have the user manage accessing objects out of a resource rather than having the @resource factory function do it presents a problem with dealing with an at-scale migration: the old code will expect the client on the `context` object while the new code will except the enclosing resource object when it is accessed as a parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change to have the user manage accessing objects out of a resource rather than having the `@resource` factory function do it presents a problem with dealing with an at-scale migration: the old code will expect the client on the `context` object while the new code will except the enclosing resource object when it is accessed as a parameter.
```

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_third_party_resource_with_interface endbefore=end_new_third_party_resource_with_interface dedent=4    return FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)
from dagster import ConfigurableResource, IAttachDifferentObjectToOpContext, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource, IAttachDifferentObjectToOpContext):
    conn_string: str

    def get_object_to_set_on_execution_context(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return self.get_client()

    def get_client(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)

@asset
def new_asset(fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    client = fancy_db.get_client()
    client.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def existing_asset(context) -> None:
    # This code now works because context.resources.fancy_db is now a FancyDbClient
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")

> ```

Reviewer 2: short call-to-action referring to slack etc might be good - may also be good to include a brief section about migrating use of 3rd party resources (it's simpler than migrating your own, but some users might be curious about that specific case)

from dagster import OpExecutionContext, asset

@asset
def asset_one(context: OpExecutionContext, fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    assert fancy_db
```

## Migrating a resource that uses a separate object for business logic

Frequently users want to separate out the interaction with the configuration system from the object that contains the actual business logic. Maybe it is pre-existing or third-party code that knows nothing about the configuration system and shouldn't. Or it is a complex client that requires mutable state and bookkeeping. In the old API the engineer would have written a `@resource` decorator that returns that object directly.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_old_third_party_resource endbefore=end_old_third_party_resource dedent=4
# Pre-existing code that you don't want to alter
class FancyDbClient:
    def __init__(self, conn_string: str) -> None:
        self.conn_string = conn_string

    def execute_query(self, query: str) -> None:

>         ...

Author: hey @benpankow re: your suggestion about third-party code, what if we just noted here that this would be the same if

`from fancy_db import FancyDbClient`

Reviewer 2: new change looks good to me 👍

---
title: Migrating to Pythonic resources and config | Dagster
description: A guide to incrementally migrating existing Dagster codebases to Pythonic resources and config
---

# Migrating to Pythonic Resources and Config

> With Dagster 1.3 we added a new set of APIs to our resources and config based on Pydantic, rather than our own bespoke configuration schema API. This added more type safety and made the Python APIs more idiomatic. This guide provides information on how to migrate from our legacy resource and config system to this new system, even in large existing Dagster codebases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Dagster 1.3 we added a new set of APIs to our resources and config systems based on Pydantic, rather than our own bespoke configuration schema API. This added more type safety and made the Python APIs more idiomatic. This guide provides information on how to migrate from our legacy resource and config system to this new system, even in large existing Dagster codebases.
```
nit - could be a word other than systems too

## Principles

A critical part of any migration process is the ability to break the migration into a series small, low-risk changes. This reduces coordination costs and increases parallelization of work. Without an incremental process, engineers are stuck in a world where there is a one-time, high-risk migration that requires synchronized coordination with all the other stakeholders in the code base.

> We designed this new API with this in mind, allowing for old code and new code to co-exist within a single Dagster code location. Config schemas defined in Pydantic can easily be converted to the old configuration schema format. And even with Pythonic config and resources, your old code can still access them through the old APIs attached to the context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We designed this new API with this in mind, allowing for old code and new code to co-exist within a single Dagster code location. Config schemas defined in Pydantic can easily be converted to the old configuration schema format. And your assets and ops can access  Pythonic config and resources through the old APIs attached to the context, allowing you to update assets and ops separately.
```
this reads a bit better to me

> ## Using new config schema

Author: Don't think the "the" makes sense. The system allows the creation of config schema. There is no singular config schema.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_config.py  startafter=begin_new_config_schema endbefore=end_new_config_schema dedent=4
from dagster import Config, Definitions, asset

class AnAssetConfig(Config):
    conn_string: str
    port: int

@asset
def an_asset(upstream_asset, config: AnAssetConfig):
    assert config.conn_string
    assert config.port

defs = Definitions(assets=[an_asset, upstream_asset])

job_def = defs.get_implicit_global_asset_job_def()

# code to launch/execute jobs is unchanged
result = job_def.execute_in_process(
    run_config={"ops": {"an_asset": {"config": {"conn_string": "foo", "port": 1}}}}
)
```

It was a straightforward conversion of the asset itself, and you'll notice that we did not have to change the run config dictionary passed to `execute_in_process`. The same thing goes for `RunRequest` instances in sensors and schedules: you do not have to update them in lockstep order to migrate to the Pythonic config API.

> However we do enable the use of strong typing to launch runs, which you can opt-in to if you so choose. For that you can use the <PyObject object="RunRequest"/> object.

Author: Nope not dumb. Typo. Should be RunConfig.

)
```

### Step 3: Using the resource in assets

Now we can move the asset to take the resource as a parameter.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_style_resource_on_param endbefore=end_new_style_resource_on_param dedent=4
from dagster import OpExecutionContext, asset

@asset
def asset_one(context: OpExecutionContext, fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    assert fancy_db
```

## Migrating a resource that uses a separate object for business logic

Frequently users want to separate out the interaction with the configuration system from the object that contains the actual business logic. Maybe it is pre-existing or third-party code that knows nothing about the configuration system and shouldn't. Or it is a complex client that requires mutable state and bookkeeping. In the old API the engineer would have written a `@resource` decorator that returns that object directly.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_old_third_party_resource endbefore=end_old_third_party_resource dedent=4
# Pre-existing code that you don't want to alter

> class FancyDbClient:

Reviewer 3: personal preference, and i know the beginning of the section says "this is the code we'll be referencing the whole time" but i feel like this third party code snippet might benefit from the class names being different than the previous examples. Like `FanycDbClient` -> `PreExistingDbClient` and `from fancy_db import FancyDbClient` -> `from external_fancy_db import ExternalFancyDbClient` or something like that

Author: Started down this road but it didn't really sit with me right. Totally get what you are saying.

    def __init__(self, conn_string: str) -> None:
        self.conn_string = conn_string

    def execute_query(self, query: str) -> None:
        ...

# Alternatively could have been imported from third-party library

> # from fancy_db import FancyDbClient

Author: went ahead and did this update

from dagster import InitResourceContext, asset, resource

@resource(config_schema={"conn_string": str})
def fancy_db_resource(context: InitResourceContext) -> FancyDbClient:
    return FancyDbClient(context.resource_config["conn_string"])

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def existing_asset(context) -> None:
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

> With Pythonic style resources you would write a class that can return that client from a method. In code that consumes that resource you would call `get_client()` access the underlying client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Pythonic style resources you would write a class that can return that client from a method. In code that consumes that resource you would call that method to access the underlying client.
```
or 
```suggestion
With Pythonic style resources you would write a class that can return that client from a method (called `get_client`). In code that consumes that resource you would call `get_client()` to access the underlying client.
```

        some_expensive_teardown()

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def asset_one(context) -> None:
    # some_expensive_setup() has been called, but some_expensive_teardown() has not
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

In the end, this caused confusion and difficult-to-understand stack traces. With Pythonic resources, the user manages this in the body of the asset or op directly.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_resource_code_contextmanager endbefore=end_new_resource_code_contextmanager dedent=4
from contextlib import contextmanager

from dagster import ConfigurableResource, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource):
    conn_string: str

    @contextmanager
    def get_client(self) -> Iterator[FancyDbClient]:
        try:
            some_expensive_setup()
            yield FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)
        finally:
            some_expensive_teardown()

@asset
def asset_one(fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    with fancy_db.get_client() as client:
        client.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

> ### Passing a resource directly while having the underlying client on the context

Reviewer 3: fwiw i find this title very confusing (in both iterations). Not sure what you mean by `having the underlying client on the context`

> ### Passing a resource directly while having the underlying client on the context

Author: Agree very clunky. Will reword.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_new_third_party_resource_with_interface endbefore=end_new_third_party_resource_with_interface dedent=4    return FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)
from dagster import ConfigurableResource, IAttachDifferentObjectToOpContext, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource, IAttachDifferentObjectToOpContext):
    conn_string: str

    def get_object_to_set_on_execution_context(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return self.get_client()

    def get_client(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)

@asset
def new_asset(fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    client = fancy_db.get_client()
    client.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def existing_asset(context) -> None:
    # This code now works because context.resources.fancy_db is now a FancyDbClient
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

> ## Related
> 
> For additional reading:
> 
> - The concept [page](/concepts/configuration/config-schema) for run configuration.
> - The concept [page](/concepts/configuration/resources) for resources.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
---

## Related

<ArticleList>
  <ArticleListItem
    title="Run configuration"
    href="/concepts/configuration/config-schema"
  ></ArticleListItem>
  <ArticleListItem
    title="Resources"
     href="/concepts/configuration/resources"
  ></ArticleListItem>
<ArticleList>
```

[1]

Puts the related links in our `ArticleList` component.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_config.py  startafter=begin_new_config_schema endbefore=end_new_config_schema dedent=4
from dagster import Config, Definitions, asset

class AnAssetConfig(Config):
    conn_string: str
    port: int

@asset
def an_asset(upstream_asset, config: AnAssetConfig):
    assert config.conn_string
    assert config.port

defs = Definitions(assets=[an_asset, upstream_asset])

job_def = defs.get_implicit_global_asset_job_def()

# code to launch/execute jobs is unchanged
result = job_def.execute_in_process(
    run_config={"ops": {"an_asset": {"config": {"conn_string": "foo", "port": 1}}}}
)
```

Notice that we did not have to change the run config dictionary passed to `execute_in_process`. The same thing goes for <PyObject object="RunRequest"/> instances in sensors and schedules: you do not have to update them in lockstep order to migrate to the Pythonic config API.

> However we do enable the use of strong typing to launch runs, which you can opt-in to if you so choose. For that you can use the <PyObject object="RunConfig"/> object.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, we do enable the use of strong typing to launch runs which you can opt into if you so choose. To do this, you can use the <PyObject object="RunConfig"/> object.
```

Small grammar tweaks

- Pre-existing or third-party code that doesn't know about the configuration system - and shouldn't
- A complex client that requires mutable state and bookkeeping

In these cases, using the old resource API, you would have written a `@resource` decorator that returns that object directly.

```python file=/guides/dagster/migrating_to_python_resources_and_config/migrating_resources.py  startafter=begin_old_third_party_resource endbefore=end_old_third_party_resource dedent=4
# Pre-existing code that you don't want to alter
class FancyDbClient:
    def __init__(self, conn_string: str) -> None:
        self.conn_string = conn_string

    def execute_query(self, query: str) -> None:
        ...

# Alternatively could have been imported from third-party library
# from fancy_db import FancyDbClient

from dagster import InitResourceContext, asset, resource

@resource(config_schema={"conn_string": str})
def fancy_db_resource(context: InitResourceContext) -> FancyDbClient:
    return FancyDbClient(context.resource_config["conn_string"])

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def existing_asset(context) -> None:
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

> With Pythonic style resources you would write a class that can return that client from a method. In code that consumes that resource you would call that method to access the underlying client.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With Pythonic-style resources you would write a class that can return that client from a method. In code that consumes that resource you would call that method to access the underlying client.
```

from dagster import ConfigurableResource, IAttachDifferentObjectToOpContext, asset

class FancyDbResource(ConfigurableResource, IAttachDifferentObjectToOpContext):
    conn_string: str

    def get_object_to_set_on_execution_context(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return self.get_client()

    def get_client(self) -> FancyDbClient:
        return FancyDbClient(self.conn_string)

@asset
def new_asset(fancy_db: FancyDbResource) -> None:
    client = fancy_db.get_client()
    client.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")

@asset(required_resource_keys={"fancy_db"})
def existing_asset(context) -> None:
    # This code now works because context.resources.fancy_db is now a FancyDbClient
    context.resources.fancy_db.execute_query("SELECT * FROM foo")
```

---

## Related

<ArticleList>
  <ArticleListItem
    title="Run configuration"
    href="/concepts/configuration/config-schema"
  ></ArticleListItem>
  <ArticleListItem
    title="Resources"
     href="/concepts/configuration/resources"
  ></ArticleListItem>

> <ArticleList>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
</ArticleList>
```

This is my fault; sorry!

---
title: Migrating to Pythonic resources and config | Dagster
description: A guide to incrementally migrating existing Dagster codebases to Pythonic resources and config
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# we need a title here
```
